welcome this is what is happening on the
Sun today the sixth of July 2011 as
we're going to spend a bit of time on
the comet that i mentioned in the
breaking news item that i posted
yesterday perhaps the trivia question
should be about comet's comets have
three different types of tails a dust
tail the gas tail and an iron tail which
of these always points directly away
from the Sun the answer will be given at
the end now let's take a look and see
what happened to that comet the comic
first became visible at about 1900 hours
on the fourth of July and we were able
to follow it for nearly a day using the
Soho lass goes c3 coronagraph for the
observations were interrupted by one of
those annoying data gaps the c2
instrument caught it in the edge of the
field of view here I've plotted the
position of the comment over the time
that we observed it you can see that the
point of getting further and further
apart as it approaches the Sun which
means it's accelerating as it should do
now let's take a look at the videos of
the Comets approach first ac3 instrument
which is the one with the largest field
of view then the smaller field of you
see two instrument now the question that
if the comet were to hit the Sun would
it be hitting the front side of the Sun
nearest the earth well the back side of
the Sun away from the earth look at that
we have to go to the stereo data and for
this case I'm going to use the stereo a
data which in these in images makes the
earth be on the left so it would be
hitting the back side of the Sun I hope
you'll notice that because of three
repeats it looks as though the comet is
causing the coronal mass ejection but if
you look carefully the coronal mass
ejection occurs at the beginning of the
sequence not at the end so the next
question is did it survive here I've
extrapolated the points to see when it
would have hit the Sun or when it would
have come out the other side so it'll
hit the Sun sometime before midnight
yesterday and certainly would have
reemerged for six UT today
and that didn't happen so obviously this
comet did not survive it's worth
remembering that often when there's one
comment coming in there's a whole group
it's rather like deer and cockroaches
when you see one there's probably a lot
from the ghost x-ray plot we see that
we've had no major flares in last 24 or
48 hours for that matter just a few
small be friends so Solar Flare activity
is very quiet at the moment the reason
continues to be the lack of large and
dynamic sunspot regions on the disc
region 1244 is rotating off the west
limb and we probably gone by tomorrow
ritu 1243 is relatively stable there is
a small spots group in the southeast
which hasn't been numbered yet I think
somebody's asleep at the wheel none of
these are rapidly growing more dynamic
sunspot regions with strong magnetic
fields so we can't realistically expect
any major flaring at the moment the
sunspot and magnetic movies from the HMI
instrument on the sto spacecraft show
the relatively passive nature of the
magnetic Sun at the moment the whole
eastern half of the Sun is devoid of any
major regions now we get a better view
of the region in the southeast you see
that it is not particularly spectacular
either the transition region and coronal
movies from the aia in swindon sto are
not much more promising we can see some
activity in the prominences around the
limb on the transition region movie and
the filament above region 1244 looks as
though it's about to lift off so we
should keep an eye on that for the next
couple of days in the high temperature
coronal movie I'd like you to keep an
eye out for the x-ray bright points that
keep coming and going continuously
throughout this 48-hour period but
particularly easy to see in the coronal
hole nears disk center these are in
effect mini active regions you've
already seen the coronagraph taser in
the context of the comet but loud let's
take a look at it from the point of view
of the clone mass ejection that occurs
right at the very beginning of the
sequence no seem to think that there's a
good chance that this might give us some
geomagnetic activity I'm a little
skeptical but let's wait and see the ACA
to show us that the temperature of the
solar wind has not changed very much in
the last 24 hours the speed has been
bouncing around a little but between
fairly narrow limits
and the density remains relatively high
which means we're still in a slow speed
solar wind stream the rural zones is to
be more active than yesterday which is a
bit odd because the KP index is actually
quieted down quite a bit I think we may
be dealing with the time lag issue here
however during the storm period of
yesterday there were some Aurora and we
have a picture of one here from space
weather com so in summary then the x-ray
background is at the b1 level the
sunspot numbers fall into 30 radio Sun
intensities remained concert at about 86
solar flux units so the wind speed
hasn't changed much at 380 kilometers
per second and a density of about five
protons per cubic centimeter and geo
space conditions are currently quiet so
my forecast for the next 24 hours is
there is a chance of sea flares however
a very poor chance of getting either a
more ex-players sense what number will
remain low chance of coronal mass
ejections remains good solar wind speed
will remain low and the chance getting
major geomagnetic storm in the next 24
hours is poor in the longer term they
don't seem to be any new region due back
over the limb for at least two or three
days so once again we're going to have
to rely on the emergence of new regions
or growth in existing regions to give us
any flaring activity the answer to the
trivia question is it's the iron tail
that always points away from the Sun as
the solar wind flows out radially the
ions will follow the solar wind dust
debris will be deposited along the
Comets path so one of the origins of a
meteor shower here on earth is the earth
passing through a path of an old comment
which is that the dust trail behind it
so that's it for today keep safe bye for
now
you